.. _release_notes_0_13:

What's new in 0.13
==================

survivalist 0.13.1 (2020-07-04)
-----------------------------------

This release fixes warnings that were introduced with 0.13.0.

Bug fixes
^^^^^^^^^

- Explicitly pass ``return_array=True`` in :meth:`survivalist.tree.SurvivalTree.predict`
  to avoid FutureWarning.
- Fix error when fitting :class:`survivalist.tree.SurvivalTree` with non-float
  dtype for time (#127).
- Fix RuntimeWarning: invalid value encountered in true_divide
  in :func:`survivalist.nonparametric.kaplan_meier_estimator`.
- Fix PendingDeprecationWarning about use of matrix when fitting
  :class:`survivalist.svm.FastSurvivalSVM` if optimizer is `PRSVM` or `simple`.


survivalist 0.13.0 (2020-06-28)
-----------------------------------

The highlights of this release include the addition of
:func:`survivalist.metrics.brier_score` and
:func:`survivalist.metrics.integrated_brier_score`
and compatibility with scikit-learn 0.23.

`predict_survival_function` and `predict_cumulative_hazard_function`
of :class:`survivalist.ensemble.RandomSurvivalForest` and
:class:`survivalist.tree.SurvivalTree` can now return an array of
:class:`survivalist.functions.StepFunction`, similar
to :class:`survivalist.linear_model.CoxPHSurvivalAnalysis`
by specifying ``return_array=False``. This will be the default
behavior starting with 0.14.0.

Note that this release fixes a bug in estimating
inverse probability of censoring weights (IPCW), which will
affect all estimators relying on IPCW.

Enhancements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- Make build system compatible with PEP-517/518.
- Added :func:`survivalist.metrics.brier_score` and
  :func:`survivalist.metrics.integrated_brier_score` (#101).
- :class:`survivalist.functions.StepFunction` can now be evaluated at multiple points
  in a single call.
- Update documentation on usage of `predict_survival_function` and
  `predict_cumulative_hazard_function` (#118).
- The default value of `alpha_min_ratio` of
  :class:`survivalist.linear_model.CoxnetSurvivalAnalysis` will now depend
  on the `n_samples/n_features` ratio.
  If ``n_samples > n_features``, the default value is 0.0001
  If ``n_samples <= n_features``, the default value is 0.01.
- Add support for scikit-learn 0.23 (#119).

Deprecations
^^^^^^^^^^^^

- `predict_survival_function` and `predict_cumulative_hazard_function`
  of :class:`survivalist.ensemble.RandomSurvivalForest` and
  :class:`survivalist.tree.SurvivalTree` will return an array of
  :class:`survivalist.functions.StepFunction` in the future
  (as :class:`survivalist.linear_model.CoxPHSurvivalAnalysis` does).
  For the old behavior, use `return_array=True`.

Bug fixes
^^^^^^^^^

- Fix deprecation of importing joblib via sklearn.
- Fix estimation of censoring distribution for tied times with events.
  When estimating the censoring distribution,
  by specifying ``reverse=True`` when calling
  :func:`survivalist.nonparametric.kaplan_meier_estimator`,
  we now consider events to occur before censoring.
  For tied time points with an event, those
  with an event are not considered at risk anymore and subtracted from
  the denominator of the Kaplan-Meier estimator.
  The change affects all functions relying on inverse probability
  of censoring weights, namely:

  - :class:`survivalist.nonparametric.CensoringDistributionEstimator`
  - :func:`survivalist.nonparametric.ipc_weights`
  - :class:`survivalist.linear_model.IPCRidge`
  - :func:`survivalist.metrics.cumulative_dynamic_auc`
  - :func:`survivalist.metrics.concordance_index_ipcw`

- Throw an exception when trying to estimate c-index from incomparable data (#117).
- Estimators in ``survivalist.svm`` will now throw an
  exception when trying to fit a model to data with incomparable pairs.
